[release] [statefun] Announcement blog post and Downloads page update for StateFun 3.0.0 (#433)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2021-04-14-release-statefun-3.0.0.md

---
layout: post

> title:  "Stateful Functions 3.0.0 Release Announcement"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title:  "Stateful Functions 3.0.0: Remote Functions Front and Center"
```
Adding the "slogan" to the title might make it more catchy.

subtitle: "The Apache Flink community is happy to announce the release of Stateful Functions (StateFun) 3.0.0."
date: 2021-04-14T08:00:00.000Z
categories: news
authors:
- igalshilman:
  name: "Igal Shilman"
  twitter: "IgalShilman"
- tzulitai:
  name: "Tzu-Li (Gordon) Tai"
  twitter: "tzulitai"
---

> The Apache Flink community is happy to announce the release of Stateful Functions (StateFun) 3.0.0!  This release focuses on bringing remote functions to the front and center of StateFun. It is now easier, more efficient, and more ergonomic to write applications that live in a separate process to the StateFun cluster.

Reviewer 2: This needs a sentence or two to introduce statefun to new users coming across this release announcement

Reviewer 2: @knaufk maybe you have some ideas? I need to think about it

Reviewer 2: Something like: "Stateful Functions provides a cross-platform kit for building stateful serverless applications. This release now focuses on ..."? 

Idk

Reviewer 3: I think that is, we need an introduction sentence...
Drafting one now, filling in in a bit.

Author: Applied @StephanEwen's proposed intro paragraph posted below.

> The binary distribution and source artifacts are now available on the updated [Downloads](https://flink.apache.org/downloads.html)

Reviewer: Can we move these more "technical" announcement further down in the blog post (link to artifacts and release notes)?

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: Moved this paragraph to a `Release Resources` section at the very end.

page of the Flink website, and the most recent Python SDK distribution is available on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/apache-flink-statefun/).
You can also find official StateFun Docker images of the new version on [Dockerhub](https://hub.docker.com/r/apache/flink-statefun).

For more details, check the complete [release changelog](https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?version=12348822&styleName=&projectId=12315522) 
and the [updated documentation](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-statefun-docs-release-3.0/).
We encourage you to download the release and share your feedback with the community through the [Flink mailing lists](https://flink.apache.org/community.html#mailing-lists)
or [JIRA](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/)!

{% toc %}

## Background

> Starting with the very first StateFun release before the project was donated to the Apache Software Foundation, our focus was: **making scalable stateful applications easy to build and run**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with the first StateFun release, before the project was donated to the Apache Software Foundation, our focus was: **making scalable stateful applications easy to build and run**. 
```

> The first StateFun version introduced an SDK that allowed writing stateful functions that build up a StateFun application, which is packaged and deployed as a very specific Flink job that is submitted to a Flink cluster. Having functions executing within the same JVM as Flink has some advantages such as performance and immutability of the deployment. However, it had a few limitations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first StateFun version introduced an SDK that allowed writing stateful functions that build up a StateFun application packaged and deployed as a particular Flink job submitted to a Flink cluster. Having functions executing within the same JVM as Flink has some advantages, such as the deployment's performance and immutability. However, it had a few limitations:
```

1. ❌ ⠀Functions can be written only in a JVM based language.
2. ❌ ⠀A blocking call/CPU heavy task in one function can affect other functions and operations that need to complete in a timely manner, such as checkpointing.
3. ❌ ⠀Deploying a new version of the function required a stateful upgrade of the backing Flink job.

> With StateFun 2.0.0, the debut official release after the project was donated to Apache Flink, the community introduced the concept of “remote functions”, together with an additional SDK for the Python language.
> A remote function is a function that executes in a separate process and is invoked via HTTP by Apache Flink.
> Remote functions introduces a new and exciting capability: **state and compute disaggregation** - allowing users to scale the functions independently of the Flink cluster, which essentially plays the role of handling messaging and state in a consistent and fault-tolerant manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With StateFun 2.0.0, the debut official release after the project was donated to Apache Flink, the community introduced the concept of “remote functions,” together with an additional SDK for the Python language.
A remote function is a function that executes in a separate process and is invoked via HTTP by Apache Flink.
Remote functions introduce a new and exciting capability: **state and compute disaggregation** - allowing users to scale the functions independently of the Flink cluster, which essentially plays the role of handling messaging and state in a consistent and fault-tolerant manner.
```

While remote functions did address the limitations (1) and (2) mentioned above, we still had some room to improve:
  
1. ✅ ⠀Functions can be written in any language (initially Python)
2. ✅ ⠀Blocking calls / CPU heavy computations happens in a separate process(es) 
3. ❌ ⠀Registering a new function, or changing the state definitions of an existing function required a stateful upgrade of the StateFun processes.
4. ❌ ⠀The SDK had a few friction points around state and messaging ergonomics - it had a heavy dependency on Google’s Protocol Buffers for it’s multi-language object representation.
 

With the new **StateFun 3.0** release, the community has enhanced the remote functions protocol (the protocol that describes how StateFun communicates with the remote processes) to address the issues above.

> Building on the new protocol we rewrote the Python SDK, and introduced a brand new remote Java SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building on the new protocol, we rewrote the Python SDK and introduced a brand new remote Java SDK.
```

                                 target_id=caller.id,
                                 str_value=greeting))
```

### Java

```java
static final class Greeter implements StatefulFunction {
    static final ValueSpec<Integer> VISITS = ValueSpec.named("visits").withIntType();

    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<Void> apply(Context context, Message message){
        // update the visits count
        int visits = context.storage().get(VISITS).orElse(0);
        visits++;
        context.storage().set(VISITS, visits);

        // compute a greeting
        var name = message.asUtf8String();
        var greeting = String.format("Hello there %s at the %d-th time!\n", name, visits);

        // reply to the caller with a greeting
        var caller = context.caller().get();
        context.send(
            MessageBuilder.forAddress(caller)
                .withValue(greeting)
                .build()
        );

        return context.done();
    }
}
```

Although there are some language specific differences, the terms and concepts are the same:

* an address scoped storage acting as a key-value store for a particular address.

> * A unified cross-language way to send, receive, and store values across languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* a unified cross-language way to send, receive, and store values across languages.
```

* `ValueSpec` to describe the state name, type and possibly expiration configuration. Please note that it is no longer necessary to declare the state ahead of time in a `module.yaml`.

    
For a detailed SDK tutorial, we would like to encourage you to visit:

- [Java SDK showcase](https://github.com/apache/flink-statefun-playground/tree/release-3.0/java/showcase)
- [Python SDK showcase](https://github.com/apache/flink-statefun-playground/tree/release-3.0/python/showcase)

## Dynamic Registration of State and Functions

> Starting with this release, it is now possible to dynamically register new functions, without going through a stateful upgrade cycle of the StateFun cluster (which entails the standard process of performing a stateful restart of a Flink job).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with this release, it is now possible to dynamically register new functions without going through a stateful upgrade cycle of the StateFun cluster (which entails the standard process of performing a stateful restart of a Flink job).
```
